Chapter 7: Living to Prove He Is More Precious Than Life
============================================================

The Majesty of Christ in Missions and Mercy: A Plea to This Generation 165
The Day of Missions Is Not Over
Don’t think the days of foreign missionaries are over, as if na-
tionals can finish the work. There are hundreds of peoples and 
millions of people where there are no Christian nationals to do 
same-culture evangelism. A culture must be crossed. To be sure, it may be crossed by a non-Westerner, since God is growing his 
church faster in the non-Western world.
30 That would be wonder -
ful. I have no desire to limit the joy of love. Besides, it may be that highly trained but tentative Western specialists will not be as 
fruitful as simpler, bold missionaries. Regarding missions to Mus-
lims Patrick Johnstone says, “Often the best missionaries are the 
ones who have studied little more than the basics of Islamics but have a passion for sharing Christ. In their boldness for Jesus, they 
plunge into witnessing to Muslims, where an Islamist would fear 
to go.”
31 But make no mistake. A culture will have to be crossed, 
and that’s what missions is. Missions, not same-culture evangelism 
by nationals, will finish the Great Commission.
So “pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out la-
borers into his harvest” (Matt. 9:38), and ask him if you should 
be one. Expect this prayer to change you. When Jesus told his disciples to pray it, the next thing that happened was that he ap-
pointed twelve to be his apostles and sent them out. Pray for har -
vesters, and you may become one. God often wakens desire, and gives gifts, and opens doors when we are praying and pondering 
real possibilities and real needs. Get a copy of the amazing world 
prayer guide called Operation World, and pray and read and 
30. This growth in the twentieth century is documented by Philip Jenkins, The New 
Christendom (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 2:
Over the past century . . . the center of gravity in the Christian world has shifted 
inexorably southward to Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Already today the largest 
Christian communities on the planet are to be found in Africa and Latin America. If 
we want to visualize a ‘typical’ contemporary Christian, we should think of a woman 
living in a village in Nigeria or in a Brazilian favela. As Kenyan scholar John Mbiti has observed, “the centers of the church’s universality [are] no longer in Geneva, Rome, 
Athens, Paris, London, New York, but in Kinshasa, Buenos Aires, Addis Ababa and 
Manila. Whatever Europeans or North Americans may believe, Christianity is doing very well indeed in the global South—not just surviving, but expanding.”
31. Johnstone, The Church Is Bigger Than You Think, 273.
166 Don’t Waste Your Life
ponder your way through the nations day by day.32 Think about 
the people in places like
• Libya with its six million people and perhaps ten indig-
enous believers.
• Bhutan , a hermit Buddhist kingdom in the Himalayas, 
cut off from Christian witness for millennia with only a handful of indigenous believers among its two and a half million people.
• The Maldives, off the southwest coast of India, and one of the most closed countries on earth.
• North Korea, “a pariah nation gradually starving to death under its crazed Communist leadership,”
33 with no open 
witness or church life for fifty years.
• Saudi Arabia, the headquarters of Islam where Saudi be-lievers, if found, are executed.
• India, perhaps the greatest challenge of all, with its vast Ganges plains that contain “the greatest concentration of 
unevangelized people in the world. For instance, the num-
ber of people in Uttar Pradesh in North India is about 
180,000,000 and the Christian percentage is 0.1% and 
falling.”
34
• Turkey, the secular, mainly Muslim state with an ongoing Christian witness in only fifteen of its 100 provinces.
Ponder the Amnesty Offered to the 
Nations. Take a Retreat
The point of that fragmentary list is to simply illustrate whole 
populations living in rebellion against the true God and cut off from the only One who can reconcile them to their Maker. This 
means destruction for the unbelieving and dishonor to Christ. He 
owns this world, and the allegiance of every person is his right. 
32. Patrick Johnstone and Jason Mandryk, Operation World: When We Pray God Works  
(Waynesboro, GA: Paternoster USA, 2001). See the online version at http:// www  .operation 
world .org.
33. Ibid., 222.
34. Ibid., 223.
The Majesty of Christ in Missions and Mercy: A Plea to This Generation 167
Every soul and every state is his. Abraham Kuyper put it memora-
bly: “There is not a square inch in the whole domain of our human 
existence over which Christ, who is Sovereign over all, does not 
cry: ‘Mine!’”35 Christ has come into this mutinous world, which 
he made for his own glory, and paid for an amnesty with his own blood. Everyone who lays down the weaponry of unbelief will be absolved from all crimes against the Sovereign of the universe. By faith alone enemies will become happy subjects of an everlasting 
kingdom of justice and joy. Advancing this cause with Christ is 
worth your life.
No, you don’t have to be a missionary to admire and advance 
the great purposes of God to be known and praised and enjoyed among all peoples. But if you want to be most fully satisfied with God as he triumphs in the history of redemption, you can’t go on 
with business as usual—doing your work, making your money, 
giving your tithe, eating, sleeping, playing, and going to church. 
Instead you need to stop and go away for a few days with a Bible 
and notepad, and pray and think about how your particular time and place in life fits into the great purpose of God to make the 
nations glad in him. How will you join the great global purpose 
of God expressed in Psalm 67:4, “Let the nations be glad and sing for joy”?
The Meaning of Your Discontent
Many of you should stay where you are in your present job, and simply ponder how you can fit your particular skills and relation-
ships and resources more strategically into the global purpose of 
your heavenly Father. But for others reading this book, it is going to be different. Many of you are simply not satisfied with what 
you are doing. As J.  Campbell White said, the output of your 
lives is not satisfying your deepest spiritual ambitions. We must 
be careful here. Every job has its discouragements and its seasons 
35. Abraham Kuyper, “Sphere Sovereignty,” in Abraham Kuyper, A Centennial Reader, 
ed. James D. Bratt (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerd mans, 1998), 488.
168 Don’t Waste Your Life
of darkness. We must not interpret such experiences automatically 
as a call to leave our post.
But if the discontent with your present situation is deep, recur -
rent, and lasting, and if that discontent grows in Bible-saturated 
soil, God may be calling you to a new work. If, in your discontent, 
you long to be holy, to walk pleasing to the Lord, and to magnify 
Christ with your one, brief life, then God may indeed be loosen-ing your roots in order to transplant you to a place and a ministry 
where the deep spiritual ambitions of your soul can be satisfied. 
It is true that God can be known and enjoyed in every legitimate vocation; but when he deploys you from one place to the next, he 
offers fresh and deeper drinking at the fountain of his fellowship. 
God seldom calls us to an easier life, but always calls us to know 
more of him and drink more deeply of his sustaining grace.
Should I Go on Being a Pastor?
I try to take stock of my own ministry in this way. Every year at 
our church we have a “Missions Week.” I preach on missions; we 
have guest speakers. The challenge is given. People move toward 
missions, make commitments, and join the pre-missions nurture program. And every year I reexamine my life as a pastor at this 
church. I look at what I am doing in the light of God’s global pur -
pose, and in view of the incredible spiritual darkness and misery 
of the unreached peoples of this earth. I ask myself, Is this the 
most strategic investment of my life for the sake of God’s purpose 
to make the nations glad in him? I ask my wife, “Noël, are you sensing any tugs to move closer to the front lines of the unreached 
peoples?”
Our church mission statement puts the word “spread” in 
the dominant position: “We exist to spread a passion for God’s supremacy in all things for the joy of all peoples through Jesus 
Christ.” So I ask, Am I fulfilling this mission best in the role I now 
have? When the Lord calls me to give an account of my ministry 
in the last day, will I be able to say, “Lord, I stayed at Bethlehem 
The Majesty of Christ in Missions and Mercy: A Plea to This Generation 169
because I believed I could be most instrumental there in accom-
plishing your purpose to make a name for yourself among the na-tions, and to gather your sheep from all the peoples of the earth”? 
When I can no longer say yes to that question, then my leadership 
here will be finished.
And You?
And so it is with many of you. Big issues are in the offing. May God help you. May God free you. May God give you a fresh, Christ-exalting vision for your life—whether you go to an un-
reached people or stay firmly and fruitfully at your present post. 
May your vision get its meaning from God’s great purpose to make the nations glad in him. May the cross of Christ be your only boast, and may you say, with sweet confidence, to live is Christ, 
and to die is gain.

10
My Prayer—Let None Say in 
the End, “I’ve Wasted It”
Your steadfast love, oh Lord, is better than life. You have told us 
this in many ways. With these very words you have said it through 
the mouth of your servant David: “Because your steadfast love is 
better than life, my lips will praise you” (Ps. 63:3). You have said 
it in the words of your apostle Paul, when he cried out in prison, 
“My desire is to depart and be with Christ, for that is far better” (Phil. 1:23). Oh Lord, how much better you are than life! Does your apostle Paul not use strong language! Not just “better,” but 
“far better.” You are so much better than life that your apostle 
says death is gain. “To live is Christ, and to die is gain” (v. 21). 
To lose everything this world can offer and be left with you alone 
is gain.
Why, oh Lord, is your love better than life? Surely David gives 
us the answer in the way he speaks. He does not say, “Because your steadfast love is better than life, my lips will praise your 
love.” What does he say? He says that he will praise you , not 
your love. “Because your steadfast love is better than life, my lips will praise you.” Is this not because the most loving thing about 
your love is that it brings us home to you—with eyes and hearts 
172 Don’t Waste Your Life
and minds able to see the riches of your glory? With all your 
wrath removed, and all our sin forgiven, lest anything prevent the pleasure of your presence. Is this not what divine love is—the will and work of God, to give us undeserving sinners everlasting joy in God? What else could love be, if it would be infinite! What greater prize might we be given than yourself, if we are loved!
Oh, God, you know I tremble now for fear that many of the 
ones who call you Lord have made themselves the prize and glory of your grace. How many, Lord, have made your love a witness to their worth! Is then their joy a resting in your worth or in their 
own? So many decades have gone by in which the constant mes-
sage from the world, and even from some ministers, is this: that 
love means making much of man. And so when men, with this assurance, ponder what your love might mean, they say the same: 
God’s love means making much of man. For proof they ask: Don’t you feel loved when someone calls attention to your worth?
I answer: Once I did. When life was better than the Lord, and 
not the other way around. There was a time love felt like this—when I could not conceive of any joy greater than the honor of my name. When I was so absorbed in me that it was inconceivable for joy to rise by my admiring rather than my being admired. Oh, yes, I’ve known what it is like to call the praise of men an act of love and justify this craving with the readiness to give the same. How satisfying it does seem—this love among ourselves of mutual admiration!
But now (thanks to your mighty grace!) I see it is an imitation. 
It has its roots in Eden long ago. The great destroyer of our love and joy said to our mother, Eve, “God knows that when you eat 
of it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God” (Gen. 
3:5). Like God! She should have said, “I am like God already.” She should have seen the trick. But she did not, and oh, how many do not see it yet today! She was indeed like God! You made her so—your very image-bearer. Her calling and her high design was this: to image forth her Maker’s majesty, and with her joy and trust, 
My Prayer—Let None Say in the End, “I’ve Wasted It” 173
make much of you. But then the evil thought was sown: “I could 
be like him in another way. I could be one whose majesty is seen, and love might be defined as making much of me.”
And so it came into the world, this great inversion we call 
sin. And love was made to stand now on its head. I grieve, Lord, just to put it into words, but here it is with shame: Your love no longer means that you do what you must do to make yourself our joy. It has come to mean that you do what you must do so we can feel our worth. It was a sad exchange. And doubly so: Not only did it rob our souls of that one joy that you designed to satisfy us for eternity, but worse, it robbed you of your honored place as 
Treasure of our lives.
And everything you’ve done since that dark day in Eden is 
designed to set things right. Oh, what a history of deeds and rev-
elations you have wrought to make yourself the center of our joy and take back for yourself the place of honor in the world—to be the One your people treasure more than life. How many ways you said and showed, “I made you for my glory. I made you for my praise. I made you for my honor and my name.” And, lest we miss the point, you added: “In my presence there is fullness of joy; at my right hand are pleasures forevermore. Delight yourself in me! Be glad in me and leap for joy; I am your sure and great Reward! Come taste, and even now rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”
Oh, what a grand design! To make our joy the echo of your 
excellence. To make our pleasure proof that you now hold the place of Treasure in our lives. To make the gladness of our souls the essence of our worship, and the mirror of your worth. To 
make yourself most glorified in us, oh, God, when we are satisfied 
in you. How could I, Lord, have ever been so blind to think that being loved by you means making much of me and not yourself? How could I put my eye to some great telescope, designed to make me glad with visions of the galaxies, and notice in the glass a dim reflection of my face and say, “Now I am happy, I am loved”? 
174 Don’t Waste Your Life
How could I stand before the setting sun, between the mountain 
range and the vastness of the sea, and think that everlasting joy should come from making much of me?
No, Father, love is this: At great expense you made yourself 
my glory and my boast. The cost was infinite by which you made yourself the Treasure of my life. You sent your Son, the blazing center of your beauty and your love. You gave him up to mockery, betrayal, thorns, the whip, the rod, the fists, the nails, the shame, and death. For what? To swallow up your wrath, and satisfy your righteousness, and bury all my sins as far as east is from the west and in the deepest sea, so that I might come home and see the 
galaxy. This is your love, oh, God, not to make much of me, but 
do whatever must be done so that I waken to the joy of making much of you through all eternity.
How then shall Christ not be my only boast! Not only that he 
bought yourself for me, oh, God, but is himself your perfect image and the blazing center of your radiance. What do I have that does not come from him? What gift of life or breath? What promise ever made did not receive its Yes in him? What one sweet thing—or hard thing you will soon make sweet—did I receive except that it was purchased by his blood? Not one thing I deserve, but hell. Yet everything is mine in him, and by his sacrifice alone. Oh, God, forbid that I should ever boast save in the cross of Christ, my Lord.
And now shall we who treasure Christ and know your love is 
better far than life lay up, like all the world, our treasures on this earth? Would not we hear you say, as you once said, “Fool, will not this same night your soul be taken back? And then whose will these barns of bounty be?” Forbid, oh, Lord, that while the world 
is filled with need we would sit down and say, “Soul, you have 
ample goods laid up for many years; relax, eat, drink, be merry.” A terrible reversal awaits such lovelessness. “Woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation” (Luke 6:24). We tremble at the words you spoke once to the heartless rich: “Remember in your lifetime you received good things, and that 
My Prayer—Let None Say in the End, “I’ve Wasted It” 175
poor man, beside your door, received the pain; but now the great 
reversal comes, and he has comfort here, while you lie there in anguish.”
Oh, God, such riches are a wasted life. Protect us, Lord. Grant 
us to hear and heed another call: “Lay up your treasure not on earth, but in the place where moth and thief will never come. Make treasures for yourself that cannot fail.” But then we ask, “What treasures, Lord?” We see you smile. “I am your Treasure and your great Reward. I am your food, your drink, your festal garments and your everlasting gain. I am your life and your all-satisfying Joy.”
Yes, Lord. That is enough. But we would ask, How shall we 
lay this treasure up? Is it not laid there by your grace alone and bought now once for all by Jesus’s blood? How shall we make this life—this brief and only life that we now live—a laying up of treasure there in heaven? To answer this, you know, oh, God, that I have written this small book. And I have looked not to myself or listened to some voice. But I have tried to probe your written Word and say what you have said. That is my only claim to truth—that I have echoed what you wrote.
The answer is that in this life we may begin to treasure Christ, 
and here gain, as it were, an aptitude for joy in him. A greater weight of glory waits to be enjoyed for those who grow in love to Christ. And what is love to Christ? It is the cherishing of all you are for us in him. It is the treasuring of his perfection over all the treasures of the world. It is delighting in his fellowship beyond all family and friends. It is embracing all his promises that there will be more pleasure in his presence than from all the lying promises 
of sin. It is a gladness in the present taste of glory and the hope 
of future fullness when we see him face to face. It is a quiet peace along the path he chooses for us with its pain. It is a being satisfied that nothing comes to us in vain.
There is a quiet kind of joy, oh, Lord, that Jesus did both save 
us from our sin and show us how to love. His life, as you have 
176 Don’t Waste Your Life
said, was both a purchase and a path. He died for us, and now 
calls us to die with him. He took our poverty upon himself that we, in him, might have the riches of his heaven, and he calls us now to use our riches for the poor. He did not count equality with you a thing to grasp, but made himself of no account and crossed an endless chasm between heaven and earth, so we might see what frontier missions means and join him in the final task. Is not this, then, the way we lay up treasure in your house—to give our money and ourselves to make as many rich with God forever as we can?
A quiet kind of joy, I say, because of so much suffering. I can-
not rise above the great apostle Paul who called his life a daily 
death and put it in a paradox: “sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; 
as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing everything” (2 Cor. 6:10). Oh Father, grant your church to love your glory more than gold—to cease her love affair with comfort and security. Grant that we seek the kingdom first and let the other things come as you will. Grant that we move toward need and not toward ease. Grant that the firm finality of our security in Christ free us to risk our homes and health and money on the earth. Help us to see that if we try to guard our wealth, instead of using it to show it’s not our god, then we will waste our lives, however we succeed.
Dear Lord, I tremble now to pray for readers what I barely 
feel myself. But I have tasted what our life might be if I, and they, could walk along the ever-present edge of death, and smile with utter confidence that if we fell, or possibly were pushed, it would be gain. Oh, what abandon, what great liberty, what invincible resolve to love would be our portion if we walked this way! What 
readiness to suffer for the glory of Christ! What eagerness to show 
the poor that we would gladly spend and be spent to make them glad in God for all eternity! What lowliness and meekness and freedom from the need for praise and pay! All things are ours in Christ—the world, life, death, the present, the future. All are ours, and we are Christ’s. And none of it deserved.
My Prayer—Let None Say in the End, “I’ve Wasted It” 177
And so, dear Lord, I dare to pray that everything I’ve written 
in this book, if it be true, explode with fear-defeating joy in Jesus 
Christ. Let every wavering heart remember this: you promised, 
“I will never leave you nor forsake you” (Heb. 13:5). So may we 
say with death-defying confidence, “The Lord is my helper; I will not fear; what can man do to me?” (Heb. 13:6).
Forbid that any, Lord, who read these words would have to 
say someday, “I’ve wasted it.” But grant, by your almighty Spirit and your piercing Word, that we who name Christ as the Lord would treasure him above our lives, and feel, deep in our souls, that Christ is life and death is gain. And so may we display his 
worth for all to see. And by our prizing him may he be praised in 
all the world. May he be magnified in life and death. May every neighborhood and nation see how joy in Jesus frees his people from the power of greed and fear.
Let love flow from your saints, and may it, Lord, be this: that 
even if it costs our lives, the people will be glad in God. “Let the peoples praise you, O God; let all the peoples praise you! Let the nations be glad and sing for joy” (Ps. 67:3 –  4). Take your honored 
place, oh, Christ, as the all-satisfying Treasure of the world. With trembling hands before the throne of God, and utterly dependent on your grace, we lift our voice and make this solemn vow: as God lives, and is all I ever need, I will not waste my life . . . 
through Jesus Christ, amen.

General Index
Abednego, 77–78
Abishai, 76, 78
Altizer, Thomas J. J., 26Amalekites, 75–76American Board of Commissioners 
for Foreign Missions, 157
Arnold, Matthew, 26avoidance ethic, 112, 115
Barrett, David, 163
Beelzebul, 57, 57n1
Bible, the: and Existentialism, 
24–25; learning the “severe discipline” of reading the Bible, 
26–27; unity of, 27–28
“Blowin’ in the Wind” (Dylan), 16boasting, in the cross of Christ, 
47–48, 51, 52–53, 58; dying, living, and boasting in the 
cross, 53–54
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich, 58–59; indict-
ment of “cheap grace” by, 59
Bunyan, John, 69–70
Caleb, 82
Camus, Albert, 15
Christians, 152; generous nature of, 
96; and the risk of persecution, 79–81
clothes, obsession with, 119–20
Cost of Discipleship, The (Bonhoef-
fer), 58–59death, 137, 138; being dead to the 
world, 54; the Christian life 
as many deaths, 66–67; death and the magnifying of God, 61–62; dying to the innocent 
world in a blaze of Christ’s glory, 55–56; how dying 
becomes gain, 63–64; living well because of learning to die well, 64
discontent, meaning of, 167–68Dollins, Ray, 121
Dylan, Bob, 15–17
Eames, Jacob, 146, 147
Edwards, Jonathan, 28–29, 133; 
resolutions of, 29
Edwards, Laura, 43
Eliason, Ruby, 43
Esther, 76–77eternal life, 35
Existentialism, 14–15, 16, 26; and 
the Bible, 24–25
faith, 98; definition of, 65–66; 
linking to Christ through, 53; removing the stumbling blocks 
to faith, 135
forgiveness: cherishing forgiveness, 
94; as God’s way of removing obstacles to fellowship with 
him, 94; as goodness because it